
    

    

        

    
        
                
                
                    

                

                    
                        Stack Overflow
                    



        


            	
                        About
                    
	
                    
                        Products
                    
                
	
                        For Teams
                    


            
                

                	
                        
                            Stack Overflow
                            Public questions & answers
                        
                    
	
                        
                            Stack Overflow for Teams
                            Where developers & technologists share private knowledge with coworkers
                        
                    
	
                        
                            Jobs
                            Programming & related technical career opportunities
                        
                    
	
                        
                            Talent
                            Recruit tech talent & build your employer brand
                        
                    
	
                        
                            Advertising
                            Reach developers & technologists worldwide
                        
                    
	
                        About the company
                    


            


            
                    
                        
                        
                        
    

    
        
            Loading…

        

    


    
    


    



                    

            

        
        

	
	
                            Log in
                            Sign up

            
	
            

    
        
            
                current community
            

        

        
            	
                            
                
        

        
            Stack Overflow
        
    

    

    
            help
            chat
    


                    
	
                            
        
    


                            
        

        
            Meta Stack Overflow
        
    

                    


        


        
            
your communities            


        

        

                
Sign up or log in to customize your list.                

        


        
            more stack exchange communities
            

            company blog
        

        
                

        
        
    


    



    



    



            

        
    

    
        
            Join Stack Overflow to learn, share knowledge, and build your career.

        


        
            
                    Sign up with email
                    Sign up
                
            
                
                    
                    Sign up with Google
                
                
                    
                    Sign up with GitHub
                
                
                    
                    Sign up with Facebook
                
                
        


        

            

            

            
            

            
                
            

        

        
    








    
            



    
        
            	
            
                    
                        
                            Home
                        

                    

            
        
	
                    	Public
	
            
                    Questions
            
        
	
            
                    
                        
                            Tags
                        

                    

            
        
	
            
                    
                        
                            Users
                        

                    

            
        
	Find a Job
	
            
                    
                        
                            Jobs
                        

                    

            
        
	
            
                    
                        
                            Companies
                        

                    

            
        


                
	
                        


    Teams


    
        Stack Overflow for Teams
        – Collaborate and share knowledge with a private group.
        
        

        Create a free Team
        What is Teams?
    




                                
	
                                    Teams

                                    
                                        
                                            What’s this?
                                        

                                    

                                
	
                                    
                                        
                                            
                                                
                                                    
                                                

                                                
                                            

                                            
                                                Create free Team
                                            

                                        

                                    
                                


                    
            
        
    




        
            


            
                Teams

                Q&A for work

                Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.

                
                    Learn more
                
            


            
                
            

        







        

            

    


    

        

            
                        Consistent and Admissible Heuristics

                
                        
        Ask Question
    

                

            

            
                    
                        Asked
                        7 years, 4 months ago
                    

                    
                        Active
                        2 months ago
                    

                    
                        Viewed
                        41k times
                    

            

            

                

    

    

    




    
        
            
        
        35

        

        
            
            7

        
    

    
        



        


        


    
    
                
Any consistent heuristic is also admissible. But when is a heuristic admissible but not consistent (monotone)?


Please provide an example in which this is the case.

    


        
            
                
                    search artificial-intelligence a-star heuristics 
                

            

        


    
        
            
                


    

        
            Share
        




        
            
                Follow
            
        





    

    




            


                

    
        edited May 9 '15 at 2:36
    

    
        

    

    
        seaotternerd
        
            5,78222 gold badges4040 silver badges5858 bronze badges
        

    



                

            
                
    
        asked Dec 11 '13 at 10:00
    

    
        

    

    
        RoarGRoarG
        
            66311 gold badge66 silver badges2020 bronze badges
        

    





            

        

    

    






             
    
        
            

	    


        
                    Add a comment
                 | 
            
        
         
    

    






    

    




                

                    
                    
                        
                            
                                
                                        3 Answers
                                    3
                                

                            

                            
                                
        
            Active
        
            Oldest
        
            Votes



                            

                        

                            
                    



                                          


    
        
            
        
        38

        

    
            
                
                    
                

            


    
        



        


        


    
    
As Russel and Norvig point out in Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (the most commonly used AI textbook) it is challenging to come up with a heuristic that is admissible but not consistent. 


Obviously, you can select values for nodes in a graph such that the heuristic they represent is admissible but not consistent. This paper by Felner et al has a nice example of the two ways that this is possible, but it's a little dense, so I'll summarize:


 


	This heuristic is inconsistent at c1 because it is giving a lower (i.e. less informative) lower bound on the cost to get to the goal than its parent node is. The cost estimate of getting to the goal through the parent node is at least 10 (because the cost of the path to p is 5 and the heuristic estimate at p is also 5). The cost estimate for getting to the goal through c1, however, is just 8 (cost of parent (5), plus cost of path from parent (1), plus heuristic estimate at c1 (2)).
	Since this graph is undirected, this heuristic is also inconsistent at c2, because going from c2 to p has the same problem as above.



Felner et al also provide a few concrete examples of an admissible but inconsistent heuristic. Consider the 8-puzzle problem:


 


In this puzzle there are 8 sliding tiles numbered 1-8, and one empty space. The tiles start out out of order (as in the image on the left). The goal is to get the puzzle into the state shown above on the right exclusively by sliding tiles into the empty space. The classic heuristic for this problem (Manhattan distance of each tile to the location where it is supposed to be) is admissible and consistent. 


However, you could come up with a different heuristic. Maybe you just want to look at Manhattan distance (i.e. the number of squares away) of the 1, the 2, and the 3 to the locations in which they are supposed to be in the goal state. The heuristic, while less informative than Manhattan distance of all tiles, is still admissible and consistent. 


But let's say that you choose an additional group of squares, perhaps 5, 6, and 7. And then let's say that the way you calculate the heuristic at each node is by randomly selecting one of those sets (1,2, and 3) or (5, 6, and 7) and computing their Manhattan distance to their goal locations. This heuristic is still admissible - it can only ever underestimate or match the number of moves needed to get to the goal state. However, it is no longer consistent - there isn't a clear relationship between the heuristic estimates at each node.

    

    
        
            
            
                


    

        
            Share
        




        
            
                Follow
            
        





    

    




            

            

    
        edited May 8 '16 at 3:05
    

    
        
    

    
        
        
            
        

    



            



            
                
    
        answered Dec 11 '13 at 23:47
    

    
        

    

    
        seaotternerdseaotternerd
        
            5,78222 gold badges4040 silver badges5858 bronze badges
        

    





            

        

    

    






            1 
    
        
            	
        
            
                    8
            

        

        
            
                
                In fact, Felner et al write in section 6: "As illustrated in the quote from Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach [38] given earlier, there is a perception that inconsistent admissible heuristics are hard to create. However, it turns out that this is not true." - for the rest, great answer, thanks.
                
– user1544337
                Oct 18 '14 at 13:17
                        
                            
                        
            

        

    


	    


        
                    Add a comment
                 | 
            
        
         
    

    




    

    



                                          


    
        
            
        
        2

        

    
            
                
                    
                

            


    
        



        


        


    
    
Long dead, but I'll give my two cents anyway. I think by far the easiest way to think of this is that an admissible heuristic says that you can't overshoot when getting to a particular defined goal node, while a consistent heuristic says that you can't overshoot when getting to ANY node. This makes the relationships clear: since the goal node is some node, a consistent heuristic is admissible. But since admissible only guarantees this property for one node, admissible does not imply consistency. 

    

    
        
            
            
                


    

        
            Share
        




        
            
                Follow
            
        





    

    




            

            

    
        edited Jan 12 '15 at 13:50
    

    
        

    

    
        kenor
        
            1,76711 gold badge1515 silver badges2727 bronze badges
        

    



            



            
                
    
        answered Oct 30 '14 at 4:55
    

    
        

    

    
        Sam BobelSam Bobel
        
            1,5441212 silver badges2222 bronze badges
        

    





            

        

    

    






            3 
    
        
            	
        
            
                    7
            

        

        
            
                
                actually. this doesn't make sense. an admissible, not-consistent heuristic still can't "overshoot" for any node, where "overshoot" means the estimated cost is greater than the actual cost. consistency is concerned with the monotonicity of the heuristic's own estimates, not with the absolute, true cost, which is with what admissibility is concerned. it just happens that if for every step a heuristic is consistent, over k steps, it cannot overestimate a node's cost, and therefore consistent is always admissible.
                
– ealfonso
                Mar 3 '15 at 17:02
                        
                            
                        
            

        

    
	
        
            
            

        

        
            
                
                In addition to @ealfonso's comment, heuristic is the estimated cost of reaching a goal from an arbitrary node, not the cost of reaching an arbitrary node in which case you would need two parameters, a start node and an end node. In the former case, which is what is commonly used, it doesn't make sense to talk about estimated costs to arbitrary nodes.
                
– xyz
                Sep 7 '20 at 23:35
            

        

    
	
        
            
            

        

        
            
                
                I think the explanation is fine. Overshoots here means that the new total path cost should not be higher than it has to be, meaning you will always reach the most promising node.
                
– Kataran
                Dec 24 '20 at 10:02
            

        

    


	    


        
                    Add a comment
                 | 
            
        
         
    

    



                                          


    
        
            
        
        2

        

    
            
                
                    
                

            


    
        



        


        


    
    
It is best to think of a consistent heuristic as an admissible heuristic which obeys the triangle inequality:

Cost(a -> c) <= Cost(a -> b) + Cost(b -> c)


for any three nodes a, b and c in the search space, with the understanding that the cost is computed using the actual cost between adjacent nodes and using the heuristic otherwise.

    

    
        
            
            
                


    

        
            Share
        




        
            
                Follow
            
        





    

    




            

            

    
        edited Feb 18 at 22:42
    

    
        
    

    
        
        
            
        

    



            



            
                
    
        answered Aug 19 '20 at 11:50
    

    
        

    

    
        Rabih KodeihRabih Kodeih
        
            8,5221010 gold badges4444 silver badges5454 bronze badges
        

    





            

        

    

    






             
    
        
            

	    


        
                    Add a comment
                 | 
            
        
         
    

    




                        
                            
                                
                                
                                
                                
                                    Your Answer
                                

                                    

    






        
            
                

                
                    
                        
                    

                    

                

            

        


    
    
        Thanks for contributing an answer to Stack Overflow!
	Please be sure to answer the question. Provide details and share your research!

But avoid …
	Asking for help, clarification, or responding to other answers.
	Making statements based on opinion; back them up with references or personal experience.

To learn more, see our tips on writing great answers.

    

    
        
    




    
        Draft saved

        Draft discarded

    



            

            


        
            
            
        






                                
                                                
                
                    
                        Sign up or log in

                        
                        
                             Sign up using Google
                        

                        
                             Sign up using Facebook
                        

                        
                             Sign up using Email and Password
                        

                    

                    
                    
                    Submit
                    
                                Post as a guest

            
                
                    Name
                    
                        
                    

                

            

            
                
                    
                        
                            Email
                            Required, but never shown

                        

                    

                    
                        
                    

                

            


                    

                

            

            
            
                        Post as a guest

            
                
                    Name
                    
                        
                    

                

            

            
                
                    
                        
                            Email
                            Required, but never shown

                        

                    

                    
                        
                    

                

            


            


                                


                                    
                                        
Post Your Answer                                        
                                        
                                            Discard
                                        
                                            
                                                By clicking “Post Your Answer”, you agree to our terms of service, privacy policy and cookie policy
                                            

                                    

                                    

                            




                            
Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged search artificial-intelligence a-star heuristics  or ask your own question.                            

                

            

            
                    

                

    

                        The Overflow Blog
                    

        	
            
            

            
                Podcast 332: Non-fungible Talking
            

        
	
            
            

            
                The Loop: Our Community & Public Platform Roadmap for Q2 2021
            

        


                        Featured on Meta
                    

        	
            

            

            
                Stack Overflow for Teams is now free for up to 50 users, forever
            

        
	
            

            

            
                New onboarding for review queues
            

        
	
            

            

            
                Outdated Answers: results from use-case survey
            

        
	
            

            

            
                Downvotes Survey results
            

        







    

    




    

    




                    
	Linked

	
            
				
					21

				
				What is the difference between monotonicity and the admissibility of a heuristic?
			

            
				
					10

				
				Can someone give me an example of admissible heuristic that is not consistent?
			

            
				
					4

				
				Intuitively understanding why consistency is required for optimality in A* search?
			

            
				
					1

				
				Monotonicity and A*. Is it optimal?
			

	





                    
                        Related

                        
                                
                                    
                                        21

                                    
                                    What is the difference between monotonicity and the admissibility of a heuristic?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        20

                                    
                                    A* admissible heuristics on a grid with teleporters?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        5

                                    
                                    Why isn't my heuristic for the A* algorithm admissible?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        3

                                    
                                    Usage of admissible and consistent heuristics in A*
                                

                                
                                    
                                        1966

                                    
                                    What is the optimal algorithm for the game 2048?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        6

                                    
                                    Why do admissable heuristics guarantee optimality?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        6

                                    
                                    Admissible Heuristic Manhattan Distance
                                

                                
                                    
                                        10

                                    
                                    Can someone give me an example of admissible heuristic that is not consistent?
                                

                                
                                    
                                        2

                                    
                                    Admissible heuristic function
                                

                                
                                    
                                        9

                                    
                                    Why does A* with admissible non consistent heuristic find non optimal solution?
                                

                        

                    


                
    
        
            Hot Network Questions
        
    

    	
                

                    How can one wish someone a "good night" when they sleep during the day?
                

            
	
                

                    When shall those who hunger and thirst for righteousness be satisfied? Matthew 5:6
                

            
	
                

                    What is the source of the given hadith?
                

            
	
                

                    How to create a new column in SELECT CASE when string contains Arabic words?
                

            
	
                

                    With all the rain Seattle gets, why is widespread flooding relatively rare?
                

            
	
                

                    Why does my cat shed so much?
                

            
	
                

                    Linebreak in multirow using tabularx
                

            
	
                

                    Why does the Java compiler 11 use invokevirtual to call private methods?
                

            
	
                

                    Allowable Discrimination For Jobs
                

            
	
                

                    Can music be arrhythmic?
                

            
	
                

                    Duplicates in "n × hamming weight of n" sequence
                

            
	
                

                    No canonical isomorphism
                

            
	
                

                    Simulate bitmap mode in photoshop for e-ink photo preparation
                

            
	
                

                    Does a character taking the Ready action perceive time?
                

            
	
                

                    Were kamikaze pilots an effective strategy for Japan?
                

            
	
                

                    Time complexity O(m+n) Vs O(n)
                

            
	
                

                    Help me get the day of the week correct
                

            
	
                

                    Understanding \add@unicode@accent and renewing it for conjoining diacritics
                

            
	
                

                    What kind of tools are available to an ATC handling traffic in the terminal airspace to predict aircraft trajectories?
                

            
	
                

                    Could an airliner with only one functioning engine recover from a stall?
                

            
	
                

                    Does tuning music to A = 432 Hz versus A = 440 Hz have a measurable effect on listeners?
                

            
	
                

                    What is the max current that can be drained from I/O port's VCC pin (pin4 - 5 V)
                

            
	
                

                    How to skip over a long period of time
                

            
	
                

                    Why do white supremacists use the term "Anglo Saxon values"?
                

            



        
            more hot questions
        



                            
        
            
            Question feed
        
    

    
        
            
                Subscribe to RSS
            

            
                
                    
                        Question feed
                        To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.

                    
                

                
                    
                    
                

            

            
                
            
        

    

            

    









        

    


        


            
        
                
                    
                    
                

            
                    
                        Stack Overflow

                        	Questions
	Jobs
	Developer Jobs Directory
	Salary Calculator
	Help
	Mobile


                    

                    
                        Products

                        	Teams
	Talent
	Advertising
	Enterprise


                    

                
                    Company

                    	About
	Press
	Work Here
	Legal
	Privacy Policy
	Terms of Service
	Contact Us
	Cookie Settings
	Cookie Policy


                

                
                    
                    
                        Stack Exchange
 Network

                        	Technology
	Life / Arts
	Culture / Recreation
	Science
	Other


                    

                

                
                        
        	Stack Overflow
	Server Fault
	Super User
	Web Applications
	Ask Ubuntu
	Webmasters
	Game Development


	TeX - LaTeX
	Software Engineering
	Unix & Linux
	Ask Different (Apple)
	WordPress Development
	Geographic Information Systems
	Electrical Engineering


	Android Enthusiasts
	Information Security
	Database Administrators
	Drupal Answers
	SharePoint
	User Experience
	Mathematica


	Salesforce
	ExpressionEngine® Answers
	Stack Overflow em Português
	Blender
	Network Engineering
	Cryptography
	Code Review


	Magento
	Software Recommendations
	Signal Processing
	Emacs
	Raspberry Pi
	Stack Overflow на русском
	Code Golf


	Stack Overflow en español
	Ethereum
	Data Science
	Arduino
	Bitcoin
	Software Quality Assurance & Testing
	Sound Design


	Windows Phone
	
                    
                        
                            more (28)
                        
                    
                


    

    
        	Photography
	Science Fiction & Fantasy
	Graphic Design
	Movies & TV
	Music: Practice & Theory
	Worldbuilding
	Video Production


	Seasoned Advice (cooking)
	Home Improvement
	Personal Finance & Money
	Academia
	Law
	Physical Fitness
	Gardening & Landscaping


	Parenting
	
                    
                        
                            more (10)
                        
                    
                


    

    
        	English Language & Usage
	Skeptics
	Mi Yodeya (Judaism)
	Travel
	Christianity
	English Language Learners
	Japanese Language


	Chinese Language
	French Language
	German Language
	Biblical Hermeneutics
	History
	Spanish Language
	Islam


	Русский язык
	Russian Language
	Arqade (gaming)
	Bicycles
	Role-playing Games
	Anime & Manga
	Puzzling


	Motor Vehicle Maintenance & Repair
	Board & Card Games
	Bricks
	Homebrewing
	Martial Arts
	The Great Outdoors
	Poker


	Chess
	Sports
	
                    
                        
                            more (16)
                        
                    
                


    

    
        	MathOverflow
	Mathematics
	Cross Validated (stats)
	Theoretical Computer Science
	Physics
	Chemistry
	Biology


	Computer Science
	Philosophy
	Linguistics
	Psychology & Neuroscience
	Computational Science
	
                    
                        
                            more (10)
                        
                    
                


    

    
        	Meta Stack Exchange
	Stack Apps
	API
	Data


    


                

            
            
                	Blog
	Facebook
	Twitter
	LinkedIn
	Instagram



                
site design / logo © 2021 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under cc by-sa.                    rev 2021.4.23.39140
                

            

        


    

            
    
        Stack Overflow works best with JavaScript enabled
            
        

    


            

        
                
                    
                        
                        
                    
                    
                        Your privacy
                    

                    
                        By clicking “Accept all cookies”, you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy.
                    

                    
                        
                            Accept all cookies
                        

                        
                            Customize settings
                        
                    

                

    

    

    

     

    


    
    